Readme.md, before:

![Test Status](https://github.com/omarfawzi/Nginx-Ratelimiter-Proxy/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/omarfawzi/Nginx-Ratelimiter-Proxy/graph/badge.svg?token=UAFTLUSL8R)](https://codecov.io/github/omarfawzi/Nginx-Ratelimiter-Proxy)

# 📌 NGINX Rate Limiter Proxy

- [Overview](#overview)  
- [Key Features](#key-features)  
- [Architecture](#architecture)  
- [Interaction Flow](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Client Request](#interaction-flow)  
  - [NGINX Proxy](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Rate Limiting](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Decision-Making & Request Handling](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Main Application](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Response](#interaction-flow)  
- [Configuration](#configuration)  
  - [Rate Limit Rules](#rate-limit-rules)  
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)  
- [Running the Proxy](#running-the-proxy)  
  - [Docker Setup](#running-the-proxy)  
  - [Custom Resolver](#custom-resolver)  
- [Why Use Redis Over Memcached?](#-why-use-redis-over-memcached-for-rate-limiting)  
  - [Atomic Operations](#-atomic-operations)  
  - [Support for Different Algorithms](#-support-for-different-algorithms)  
  - [Avoiding Redis Replicas](#%EF%B8%8F-important-avoid-using-redis-replicas-for-rate-limiting)
- [Extending Nginx Configuration with Snippets](#%EF%B8%8F-extending-nginx-configuration-with-snippets)
  - [How It Works](#how-it-works) 
  - [How to Add Custom Snippets](#how-to-add-custom-snippets) 
- [Prometheus](#prometheus)  
- [Request Flow](#request-flow)

## Overview

This **distributed** lightweight rate limiter serves as a **reverse proxy**, regulating incoming traffic and enforcing rate limits **before requests reach your backend**. By controlling excessive traffic and potential abuse, it enhances both security and performance.

## Key Features

- **Kubernetes Sidecar Proxy**: Designed to manage traffic **before it enters your main application container**, ensuring seamless rate limiting within a Kubernetes environment.
- **NGINX + Lua**: Implemented using **Lua scripting within NGINX**, leveraging `lua-resty-global-throttle` and `lua-resty-redis`.
- **Flexible Caching**: Supports both **Redis** and **Memcached** as distributed caching providers.
- **Configurable Rules**: Rate limit rules are **defined in a YAML file**, allowing for flexible and dynamic configurations.

## Architecture

```mermaid
graph TD
   subgraph Infrastructure
      B[Nginx Proxy] -- Rate Limit Check --> C{Cache Provider}
      C -- 429 Too Many Requests --> B

      style B fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
      style C fill:#ccf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
      style B fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
      classDef rate_limiting fill:#ffc,stroke:#333;
      class C rate_limiting
   end

   subgraph Application
      E[Main Application]
      style E fill:#eef,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
   end

   B -- Forward if allowed --> E
   E -- Response --> B
   B -- Response --> A
   A -- Request --> B

   classDef external fill:#eee,stroke:#333
   class A external

   classDef container fill:#ccf,stroke:#333
   class E container

   classDef proxy fill:#f9f,stroke:#333
   class B proxy

   linkStyle 0,1,2,3 stroke:#0aa,stroke-width:2px;
   linkStyle 4,5 stroke:#080,stroke-width:2px;
   
   classDef cache fill:#ddf,stroke:#333
   class D1,D2,D3 cache

   subgraph Client
      A[Client]
   end
```

## Interaction Flow

1. **Client Request**: The client sends a request to the application.
2. **NGINX Proxy**: The request is intercepted by the NGINX proxy.
3. **Rate Limiting**: The proxy checks the request against the rate limiting rules defined in the YAML file.
4. **Decision-Making & Request Handling**:
   - **Ignored Segments**: The request IP/user is first checked against the ignoredSegments configuration. If matched, rate limiting is bypassed, and the request is forwarded.
   - **Rate Limit Exceeded**: If the request exceeds the defined rate limit, a `429 Too Many Requests` response is immediately returned to the client.
   - **Rate Limit Within Limits**: If the request is within the rate limit, it is proxied to the main application.
   - **Lua Exception Handling**: In the event of an exception within the Lua rate limiting script, the request is still proxied to the main application (this should be carefully considered and potentially logged/monitored).
   - **Rules Precedence**: Explicit IP addresses in the configuration take priority over users and generic CIDR ranges (e.g., 0.0.0.0/0).
5. **Main Application**: The request is processed by the main application if it passes the rate limiting check.
6. **Response**: The main application's response travels back through the NGINX proxy to the client.

## Configuration

### Rate Limit Rules

Rate limit rules are defined in the ratelimits.yaml file. The structure of the YAML file is as follows:

```yaml
ignoredSegments:
   users:
      - admin
   ips:
      - 127.0.0.1
   urls: 
     - /v1/ping

rules:
  /v1:
    users:
      user2: 
        limit: 50
        window: 60
    ips:
      192.168.1.1: 
        limit: 200
        window: 60
  ^/v2/[0-9]$:
    users:
      user3:
        limit: 30
        window: 60
```
- `ignoredSegments`: Defines users, IPs and URLs for which rate limiting should be skipped. This is useful for administrative users, urls or specific trusted IPs.
- `rules`: Contains the rate limit rules for different URI paths.
- `path`: The URI path to which the rate limit applies, to apply ratelimits for all paths you can provide `/` as a global path, for regex paths refer to https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module?tab=readme-ov-file#ngxrematch.
- `user/IP`: The user or IP address to which the rate limit applies.
- `limit`: The maximum number of requests allowed within the time window.
- `window`: The time window in seconds during which the limit applies.


> 🔹 **Configuration Note**:  
> Ensure that your `ratelimits.yaml` file is mounted to: `/usr/local/openresty/nginx/lua/ratelimits.yaml`
>
> 🔹 **Global Rate Limiting (`0.0.0.0/0`)**:  
> If `0.0.0.0/0` is specified in the rules, rate limiting will be **applied per IP** rather than globally.  
> For example, if the limit is set to **10 requests per second (RPS)** and two clients: `127.0.0.1` and `127.0.0.2` make requests, each IP will be allowed **10 RPS independently**.

### Environment Variables

|                              | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Required | Default                         |
|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|---------------------------------|
| `UPSTREAM_PORT`              | The port of the main application.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | ✅ | -                               |
| `UPSTREAM_HOST`              | The hostname of the main application.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | ✅ | -                               |
| `UPSTREAM_TYPE`              | The type of upstream server. Valid values: `http` (for HTTP upstreams) and `fastcgi` (for FastCGI upstreams).                                                                                                                                                                                                                | ✅ | `http`                          |
| `INDEX_FILE`                 | The default index file for FastCGI upstreams.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | ❌ | `index.php`                     |
| `SCRIPT_FILENAME`            | The script filename for FastCGI upstreams.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | ❌ | `/var/www/app/public/index.php` |
| `CACHE_HOST`                 | The hostname of the distributed cache.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_PORT`                 | The port of the distributed cache.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_PROVIDER`             | The provider of the distributed cache, either `redis` or `memcached`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_PREFIX`               | A unique cache prefix per server group/namespace that reflects the context where rate limits should be applied.                                                                                                                                                                                                              | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_ALGO`                 | Specifies the rate-limiting algorithm to use. Options: `fixed-window`, `sliding-window`, `leaky-bucket`, or `token-bucket`. Only applicable when using `redis`.                                                                                                                                                              | ❌ | `token-bucket`                  |
| `REMOTE_IP_KEY`              | Defines the request variable to use as the source IP for rate limiting. Options: <br> - `http_cf_connecting_ip`: Extracts IP from `CF-Connecting-IP` (Cloudflare). <br> - `http_x_forwarded_for`: Uses the first IP in `X-Forwarded-For` header. <br> - `remote_addr`: Uses `ngx.var.remote_addr` (default NGINX client IP). | ✅ | -                               |
| `PROMETHEUS_METRICS_ENABLED` | Enables Prometheus metrics export.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ❌ | `false`                         |
| `LOGGING_ENABLED`            | Enables NGINX logs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | ❌ | `true`                          |



## Running the Proxy

To run the NGINX Rate Limiter Proxy using Docker, you need to mount the rate limit configuration file and set the required environment variables.

```sh
docker run --rm --platform linux/amd64 \
  -v $(pwd)/ratelimits.yaml:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/lua/ratelimits.yaml \
  -e UPSTREAM_HOST=localhost \
  -e UPSTREAM_TYPE=http \
  -e UPSTREAM_PORT=3000 \
  -e CACHE_HOST=mcrouter \
  -e CACHE_PORT=5000 \
  -e CACHE_PROVIDER=memcached \
  -e CACHE_PREFIX=local \
  -e REMOTE_IP_KEY=remote_addr \
  ghcr.io/omarfawzi/nginx-ratelimiter-proxy:master
```

#### Custom Resolver

You can mount your own `resolver.conf` file to: `/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/resolver.conf` in order to use a custom resolver.

## 🔹 Why Use Redis Over Memcached for Rate Limiting?

When implementing **rate limiting**, Redis is generally preferred over Memcached due to its ability to handle atomic operations and structured data efficiently:

#### ✅ Atomic Operations
Redis eval commands ensures **race-condition-free** updates. Memcached lacks built-in atomic counters with expiration, making it less reliable for rate limiting.

#### ✅ Support for Different Algorithms
Supports multiple rate-limiting algorithms, including fixed window, sliding window, and token bucket.

#### 🚀 Conclusion
Redis provides **precise, reliable, and scalable rate limiting**, while Memcached **lacks the necessary atomicity and data structures** for advanced rate-limiting techniques.

#### ⚠️ Important: Avoid Using Redis Replicas for Rate Limiting

Using Redis replicas for rate limiting is **not recommended** due to potential delays in data replication. Redis replication is **asynchronous**, meaning there can be a **lag** between the master and replica nodes. This can result in **inconsistent rate limits**, where some requests might pass even after exceeding the limit due to stale data in the replica.

To ensure accurate and real-time enforcement of rate limits:
- **Always use the Redis master instance** for both read and write operations related to rate limiting.
- Replicas should only be used for **read-heavy** operations that are not time-sensitive.

Using a replica for rate limiting can lead to bypassing rate limits and unexpected behaviors, defeating the purpose of traffic control.

## 🛠️ Extending Nginx Configuration with Snippets

This setup allows for easy customization by including additional **snippet** files. These snippets let you extend the core Nginx configuration without modifying `nginx.conf`.

### How It Works
The Nginx configuration is designed to include external snippet files from the `/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/` directory:

- **`http_snippet.conf`**: Modify http settings, applied to the http context.
- **`server_snippet.conf`**: Modify server-wide settings, applied to the server context.
- **`location_snippet.conf`**: Customize location-based routing and proxying, applied to the location context.
- **`resolver.conf`**: Define custom DNS resolvers

Nginx will automatically load these files if they exist.

### How to Add Custom Snippets
To extend the logic, create your snippet files and mount them into the container:

```sh
docker run -d \
  -v $(pwd)/snippets/http_snippet.conf:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/http_snippet.conf \
  -v $(pwd)/snippets/server_snippet.conf:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/server_snippet.conf \
  -v $(pwd)/snippets/location_snippet.conf:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/location_snippet.conf \
  ghcr.io/omarfawzi/nginx-ratelimiter-proxy:master
```

## Prometheus

### Prerequisite
- Set `PROMETHEUS_METRICS_ENABLED` to `true`.

Prometheus metrics are exposed on port `9145` at the `/metrics` endpoint. This can be accessed via:

```sh
curl http://<server-ip>:9145/metrics
```
This endpoint provides various statistics, including:

- `nginx_proxy_http_requests_total`: Total number of HTTP requests categorized by host and status.
- `nginx_proxy_http_request_duration_seconds`: Histogram tracking request latency.
- `nginx_proxy_http_connections`: Gauge tracking active connections (reading, writing, waiting, active).

### Request flow 

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph IP Rules
        CheckIPRule{Is there an exact IP rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyIPRateLimit["Apply Rate Limit for IP"]
        ApplyIPRateLimit --> CheckLimit{Exceeded Limit?}
    end

    subgraph User Rules
        CheckUserRule{Is there a user rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyUserRateLimit["Apply Rate Limit for User"]
        ApplyUserRateLimit --> CheckLimit
    end

    subgraph CIDR Rules
        CheckCIDRRule{Does IP match CIDR rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyCIDRRateLimit["Apply Rate Limit for IP CIDR"]
        ApplyCIDRRateLimit --> CheckLimit
    end

    subgraph Global Rules
        CheckGlobalIPRule{Is there a global IP rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyGlobalIPRateLimit["Apply Global Rate Limit"]
        ApplyGlobalIPRateLimit --> CheckLimit
    end

    Start["Request Received"] --> CheckIgnore{Is IP/User/Url Ignored?}
    CheckIgnore -->|Yes| AllowRequest["Allow Request"]
    CheckIgnore -->|No| CheckIPRule

    CheckIPRule -->|No| CheckUserRule
    CheckUserRule -->|No| CheckCIDRRule
    CheckCIDRRule -->|No| CheckGlobalIPRule
    CheckGlobalIPRule -->|No| AllowRequest

    CheckLimit -->|Yes| ThrottleResponse["Return 429 Too Many Requests"]
    CheckLimit -->|No| AllowRequest
```

Commit message:

fix(Readme.md): add flowRate to rate limit rules configuration feat(leaky-bucket.lua & token-bucket.lua): use flowRate from rate limit rules for leaky and token bucket algorithms

Readme.md, after:

![Test Status](https://github.com/omarfawzi/Nginx-Ratelimiter-Proxy/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/omarfawzi/Nginx-Ratelimiter-Proxy/graph/badge.svg?token=UAFTLUSL8R)](https://codecov.io/github/omarfawzi/Nginx-Ratelimiter-Proxy)

# 📌 NGINX Rate Limiter Proxy

- [Overview](#overview)  
- [Key Features](#key-features)  
- [Architecture](#architecture)  
- [Interaction Flow](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Client Request](#interaction-flow)  
  - [NGINX Proxy](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Rate Limiting](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Decision-Making & Request Handling](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Main Application](#interaction-flow)  
  - [Response](#interaction-flow)  
- [Configuration](#configuration)  
  - [Rate Limit Rules](#rate-limit-rules)  
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)  
- [Running the Proxy](#running-the-proxy)  
  - [Docker Setup](#running-the-proxy)  
  - [Custom Resolver](#custom-resolver)  
- [Why Use Redis Over Memcached?](#-why-use-redis-over-memcached-for-rate-limiting)  
  - [Atomic Operations](#-atomic-operations)  
  - [Support for Different Algorithms](#-support-for-different-algorithms)  
  - [Avoiding Redis Replicas](#%EF%B8%8F-important-avoid-using-redis-replicas-for-rate-limiting)
- [Extending Nginx Configuration with Snippets](#%EF%B8%8F-extending-nginx-configuration-with-snippets)
  - [How It Works](#how-it-works) 
  - [How to Add Custom Snippets](#how-to-add-custom-snippets) 
- [Prometheus](#prometheus)  
- [Request Flow](#request-flow)

## Overview

This **distributed** lightweight rate limiter serves as a **reverse proxy**, regulating incoming traffic and enforcing rate limits **before requests reach your backend**. By controlling excessive traffic and potential abuse, it enhances both security and performance.

## Key Features

- **Kubernetes Sidecar Proxy**: Designed to manage traffic **before it enters your main application container**, ensuring seamless rate limiting within a Kubernetes environment.
- **NGINX + Lua**: Implemented using **Lua scripting within NGINX**, leveraging `lua-resty-global-throttle` and `lua-resty-redis`.
- **Flexible Caching**: Supports both **Redis** and **Memcached** as distributed caching providers.
- **Configurable Rules**: Rate limit rules are **defined in a YAML file**, allowing for flexible and dynamic configurations.

## Architecture

```mermaid
graph TD
   subgraph Infrastructure
      B[Nginx Proxy] -- Rate Limit Check --> C{Cache Provider}
      C -- 429 Too Many Requests --> B

      style B fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
      style C fill:#ccf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
      style B fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
      classDef rate_limiting fill:#ffc,stroke:#333;
      class C rate_limiting
   end

   subgraph Application
      E[Main Application]
      style E fill:#eef,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
   end

   B -- Forward if allowed --> E
   E -- Response --> B
   B -- Response --> A
   A -- Request --> B

   classDef external fill:#eee,stroke:#333
   class A external

   classDef container fill:#ccf,stroke:#333
   class E container

   classDef proxy fill:#f9f,stroke:#333
   class B proxy

   linkStyle 0,1,2,3 stroke:#0aa,stroke-width:2px;
   linkStyle 4,5 stroke:#080,stroke-width:2px;
   
   classDef cache fill:#ddf,stroke:#333
   class D1,D2,D3 cache

   subgraph Client
      A[Client]
   end
```

## Interaction Flow

1. **Client Request**: The client sends a request to the application.
2. **NGINX Proxy**: The request is intercepted by the NGINX proxy.
3. **Rate Limiting**: The proxy checks the request against the rate limiting rules defined in the YAML file.
4. **Decision-Making & Request Handling**:
   - **Ignored Segments**: The request IP/user is first checked against the ignoredSegments configuration. If matched, rate limiting is bypassed, and the request is forwarded.
   - **Rate Limit Exceeded**: If the request exceeds the defined rate limit, a `429 Too Many Requests` response is immediately returned to the client.
   - **Rate Limit Within Limits**: If the request is within the rate limit, it is proxied to the main application.
   - **Lua Exception Handling**: In the event of an exception within the Lua rate limiting script, the request is still proxied to the main application (this should be carefully considered and potentially logged/monitored).
   - **Rules Precedence**: Explicit IP addresses in the configuration take priority over users and generic CIDR ranges (e.g., 0.0.0.0/0).
5. **Main Application**: The request is processed by the main application if it passes the rate limiting check.
6. **Response**: The main application's response travels back through the NGINX proxy to the client.

## Configuration

### Rate Limit Rules

Rate limit rules are defined in the ratelimits.yaml file. The structure of the YAML file is as follows:

```yaml
ignoredSegments:
   users:
      - admin
   ips:
      - 127.0.0.1
   urls: 
     - /v1/ping

rules:
  /v1:
    users:
      user2: 
        limit: 50
        window: 60
    ips:
      192.168.1.1: 
        limit: 200
        window: 60
  ^/v2/[0-9]$:
    users:
      user3:
        flowRate: 0.6
        limit: 30
        window: 60
```
- `ignoredSegments`: Defines users, IPs and URLs for which rate limiting should be skipped. This is useful for administrative users, urls or specific trusted IPs.
- `rules`: Contains the rate limit rules for different URI paths.
- `path`: The URI path to which the rate limit applies, to apply ratelimits for all paths you can provide `/` as a global path, for regex paths refer to https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module?tab=readme-ov-file#ngxrematch.
- `user/IP`: The user or IP address to which the rate limit applies.
- `limit`: The maximum number of requests allowed within the time window.
- `window`: The time window in seconds during which the limit applies.
- `flowRate`: Specifies the rate at which requests are allowed, applicable to `leaky-bucket` (leak rate) and `token-bucket` (refill rate) algorithms. Defaults to `limit/window`.

> 🔹 **Configuration Note**:  
> Ensure that your `ratelimits.yaml` file is mounted to: `/usr/local/openresty/nginx/lua/ratelimits.yaml`
>
> 🔹 **Global Rate Limiting (`0.0.0.0/0`)**:  
> If `0.0.0.0/0` is specified in the rules, rate limiting will be **applied per IP** rather than globally.  
> For example, if the limit is set to **10 requests per second (RPS)** and two clients: `127.0.0.1` and `127.0.0.2` make requests, each IP will be allowed **10 RPS independently**.

### Environment Variables

|                              | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Required | Default                         |
|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|---------------------------------|
| `UPSTREAM_PORT`              | The port of the main application.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | ✅ | -                               |
| `UPSTREAM_HOST`              | The hostname of the main application.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | ✅ | -                               |
| `UPSTREAM_TYPE`              | The type of upstream server. Valid values: `http` (for HTTP upstreams) and `fastcgi` (for FastCGI upstreams).                                                                                                                                                                                                                | ✅ | `http`                          |
| `INDEX_FILE`                 | The default index file for FastCGI upstreams.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | ❌ | `index.php`                     |
| `SCRIPT_FILENAME`            | The script filename for FastCGI upstreams.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | ❌ | `/var/www/app/public/index.php` |
| `CACHE_HOST`                 | The hostname of the distributed cache.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_PORT`                 | The port of the distributed cache.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_PROVIDER`             | The provider of the distributed cache, either `redis` or `memcached`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_PREFIX`               | A unique cache prefix per server group/namespace that reflects the context where rate limits should be applied.                                                                                                                                                                                                              | ✅ | -                               |
| `CACHE_ALGO`                 | Specifies the rate-limiting algorithm to use. Options: `fixed-window`, `sliding-window`, `leaky-bucket`, or `token-bucket`. Only applicable when using `redis`.                                                                                                                                                              | ❌ | `token-bucket`                  |
| `REMOTE_IP_KEY`              | Defines the request variable to use as the source IP for rate limiting. Options: <br> - `http_cf_connecting_ip`: Extracts IP from `CF-Connecting-IP` (Cloudflare). <br> - `http_x_forwarded_for`: Uses the first IP in `X-Forwarded-For` header. <br> - `remote_addr`: Uses `ngx.var.remote_addr` (default NGINX client IP). | ✅ | -                               |
| `PROMETHEUS_METRICS_ENABLED` | Enables Prometheus metrics export.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | ❌ | `false`                         |
| `LOGGING_ENABLED`            | Enables NGINX logs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | ❌ | `true`                          |



## Running the Proxy

To run the NGINX Rate Limiter Proxy using Docker, you need to mount the rate limit configuration file and set the required environment variables.

```sh
docker run --rm --platform linux/amd64 \
  -v $(pwd)/ratelimits.yaml:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/lua/ratelimits.yaml \
  -e UPSTREAM_HOST=localhost \
  -e UPSTREAM_TYPE=http \
  -e UPSTREAM_PORT=3000 \
  -e CACHE_HOST=mcrouter \
  -e CACHE_PORT=5000 \
  -e CACHE_PROVIDER=memcached \
  -e CACHE_PREFIX=local \
  -e REMOTE_IP_KEY=remote_addr \
  ghcr.io/omarfawzi/nginx-ratelimiter-proxy:master
```

#### Custom Resolver

You can mount your own `resolver.conf` file to: `/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/resolver.conf` in order to use a custom resolver.

## 🔹 Why Use Redis Over Memcached for Rate Limiting?

When implementing **rate limiting**, Redis is generally preferred over Memcached due to its ability to handle atomic operations and structured data efficiently:

#### ✅ Atomic Operations
Redis eval commands ensures **race-condition-free** updates. Memcached lacks built-in atomic counters with expiration, making it less reliable for rate limiting.

#### ✅ Support for Different Algorithms
Supports multiple rate-limiting algorithms, including fixed window, sliding window, and token bucket.

#### 🚀 Conclusion
Redis provides **precise, reliable, and scalable rate limiting**, while Memcached **lacks the necessary atomicity and data structures** for advanced rate-limiting techniques.

#### ⚠️ Important: Avoid Using Redis Replicas for Rate Limiting

Using Redis replicas for rate limiting is **not recommended** due to potential delays in data replication. Redis replication is **asynchronous**, meaning there can be a **lag** between the master and replica nodes. This can result in **inconsistent rate limits**, where some requests might pass even after exceeding the limit due to stale data in the replica.

To ensure accurate and real-time enforcement of rate limits:
- **Always use the Redis master instance** for both read and write operations related to rate limiting.
- Replicas should only be used for **read-heavy** operations that are not time-sensitive.

Using a replica for rate limiting can lead to bypassing rate limits and unexpected behaviors, defeating the purpose of traffic control.

## 🛠️ Extending Nginx Configuration with Snippets

This setup allows for easy customization by including additional **snippet** files. These snippets let you extend the core Nginx configuration without modifying `nginx.conf`.

### How It Works
The Nginx configuration is designed to include external snippet files from the `/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/` directory:

- **`http_snippet.conf`**: Modify http settings, applied to the http context.
- **`server_snippet.conf`**: Modify server-wide settings, applied to the server context.
- **`location_snippet.conf`**: Customize location-based routing and proxying, applied to the location context.
- **`resolver.conf`**: Define custom DNS resolvers

Nginx will automatically load these files if they exist.

### How to Add Custom Snippets
To extend the logic, create your snippet files and mount them into the container:

```sh
docker run -d \
  -v $(pwd)/snippets/http_snippet.conf:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/http_snippet.conf \
  -v $(pwd)/snippets/server_snippet.conf:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/server_snippet.conf \
  -v $(pwd)/snippets/location_snippet.conf:/usr/local/openresty/nginx/conf/location_snippet.conf \
  ghcr.io/omarfawzi/nginx-ratelimiter-proxy:master
```

## Prometheus

### Prerequisite
- Set `PROMETHEUS_METRICS_ENABLED` to `true`.

Prometheus metrics are exposed on port `9145` at the `/metrics` endpoint. This can be accessed via:

```sh
curl http://<server-ip>:9145/metrics
```
This endpoint provides various statistics, including:

- `nginx_proxy_http_requests_total`: Total number of HTTP requests categorized by host and status.
- `nginx_proxy_http_request_duration_seconds`: Histogram tracking request latency.
- `nginx_proxy_http_connections`: Gauge tracking active connections (reading, writing, waiting, active).

### Request flow 

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph IP Rules
        CheckIPRule{Is there an exact IP rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyIPRateLimit["Apply Rate Limit for IP"]
        ApplyIPRateLimit --> CheckLimit{Exceeded Limit?}
    end

    subgraph User Rules
        CheckUserRule{Is there a user rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyUserRateLimit["Apply Rate Limit for User"]
        ApplyUserRateLimit --> CheckLimit
    end

    subgraph CIDR Rules
        CheckCIDRRule{Does IP match CIDR rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyCIDRRateLimit["Apply Rate Limit for IP CIDR"]
        ApplyCIDRRateLimit --> CheckLimit
    end

    subgraph Global Rules
        CheckGlobalIPRule{Is there a global IP rule?} -->|Yes| ApplyGlobalIPRateLimit["Apply Global Rate Limit"]
        ApplyGlobalIPRateLimit --> CheckLimit
    end

    Start["Request Received"] --> CheckIgnore{Is IP/User/Url Ignored?}
    CheckIgnore -->|Yes| AllowRequest["Allow Request"]
    CheckIgnore -->|No| CheckIPRule

    CheckIPRule -->|No| CheckUserRule
    CheckUserRule -->|No| CheckCIDRRule
    CheckCIDRRule -->|No| CheckGlobalIPRule
    CheckGlobalIPRule -->|No| AllowRequest

    CheckLimit -->|Yes| ThrottleResponse["Return 429 Too Many Requests"]
    CheckLimit -->|No| AllowRequest
```
